# 🧗‍♂️ Minimum Cost Climbing Stairs

## 📌 Problem Statement

You are given an integer array `cost` where `cost[i]` is the cost of `i-th` step on a staircase. Once you pay the cost, you can either:

- Climb one step to `i + 1`, or
- Climb two steps to `i + 2`.

You can start from either step `0` or step `1`.

🔽 **Goal:** Return the minimum cost to reach the top of the floor.

---

## Algorithm and logic explanation

The recursive solution employs a recurrence relation which is :-
$$ f(x) = c(x) + min(f(x+1), f(x+2)) $$

where,</br>
c - function which returns cost for current stair</br>
f - return the cost to reach the top from current location

The logic behind the recurrence relation is that to reach the top from the current step we can either go one step or two steps and we need the minimum cost to get to the next step.</br>
The cost of the next step is added in the current cost to get the total cost to reach the top.

## The recursive solution 

```java

// recursive solution
    public static int minCostClimbingStairs(int[] cost){
        return Math.min(dfs(cost, 0), dfs(cost, 1));
    }

    public static int dfs(int[] cost, int i){
        if (i>=cost.length) return 0;
        return cost[i] + Math.min(dfs(cost, i+1), dfs(cost, i+2));
    }
```
- Time complexity - O(n<sup> 2</sup>)
- space complexity - O(n)

where n is the number of elements.

## With memoization

```java
// memoization solution
    private static HashMap<Integer, Integer> memo;
    public static int minCostClimbingStairsMemo(int[] cost){
        memo = new HashMap<>();
        return Math.min(dfs(cost, 0), dfsMemo(cost, 1));
    }

    
    private static int dfsMemo(int[] cost, int i){
        if (i >=cost.length) return 0;
        if (memo.containsKey(i)) return memo.get(i);
        
        int result = cost[i] + Math.min(dfsMemo(cost, i+1), dfsMemo(cost, i+2));
        memo.put(i, result);
        return result;
    }
```
- In this solution we use a hashmap to store the values of f(i) that are already calculated.
- If the HashMap contains the value i, that means that we have already calculated the f(i).
- Therefore we return the value already stored.

The time complexity gets reduced because the value of f(n) is only calculated once for every n.</br>
The space complexity is the same because we need to store the values of f(n) for each n in the hashmap.
- Time complexity - O(n)
- space complexity - O(n) 