# 🧗‍♂️ Decode ways

## 📌 Problem Statement

You are given a string `s` which consists of numbers.</br>
The decoding is done via the following mapping:-</br>
- `"1" -> 'A'`
- `"2" -> 'B'`
- &ensp;...
- `"26" -> 'Z'`</br>

There are multiple ways a message can be deciphered. for example `"11106"` can be decoded into :-</br>
* `"AAJF"` with the grouping (1, 1, 10, 6)
* `"KJF"` with the grouping (11, 10, 6)
* The grouping (1, 11, 06) is invalid because "06" is not a valid code (only "6" is valid).

🔽 **Goal:** Return the number of ways the given string can be decoded.

---

## Algorithm and logic explanation


### Recursive part explanation
In this problem we divide the problem into smaller subproblems.</br>
At every index `i` of the string `s` we have two choices:-
1. Take one digit if it is between `1` and `9`.
2. Take two digits if it's between `10` and `26`.

In this way we explore all the ways recursively.</br>
- Time complexity - O(2<sup>n</sup>)
- space complexity - O(n)</br>

Explanation of the base cases:-</br>
- We are returning `1` only once we reach the end because we need one comlete set of valid number groupings in order to decode the text once.
- We are returning `0` when we find any leading zeroes because that is invalid.
## memoization
The solution below uses the above recursion logic with memoization applied on top of it.

```java

    private Map<Integer, Integer> memo;
    public int numDecodings(String s) {
        memo = new HashMap<>();
        return dfs(s, 0);
    }
    private int dfs(String s, int i){
        if(i >= s.length()) return 1;
        if(s.charAt(i) == '0') return 0;
        if(memo.containsKey(i)) return memo.get(i);

        int res = dfs(s, i+1);
        if(i+1<s.length()){
            int num = Integer.parseInt(s.substring(i, i+2));
            if(num>=10 && num<=26){
                res+=dfs(s, i+2);
            }
        }
        memo.put(i, res);//always add the result
        return res;
    }
```
- In this solution we use a hashmap to store the values of f(i) that are already calculated.
- If the HashMap contains the value i, that means that we have already calculated the f(i).
- Therefore we return the value already stored.

The time complexity gets reduced from pure recursive solution because the value of f(n) is only calculated once for every n.</br>
The space complexity is the same because we need to store the values of f(n) for each n in the hashmap.
- Time complexity - O(n)
- space complexity - O(n)

## Tabulation

### Idea
Build up a dp array from the end of the string to the beggining. where,</br>
- dp[i] = no. of ways to decode the substring s.substring(i)

### Steps
1. Create a dp array of size `n+1`.
2. dp[n] = 1 (empty string has `1` way to decode)
3. Iterate from the end to the start of the string:
    - if `s.charAt(i) == '0'` : set `dp[i] = 0` (since 0 does not have a decoding on its own)
    - else : add `dp[i+1]` and possibly `dp[i+2]` if `s.substring(i, i+2)` is valid

#### why do we return 0 when we encounter '0'
There is no direct mapping of 0 to any charecter.</br>
We can only use zero trailing other numbers such as `10` or `20`.</br>
So when we encounter 0 it is invalid and there is no way we can decode strings with leading zeroes.

```java
public int numDecodings(String s) {
        // tabulation solution
        int n = s.length();
        int[] dp = new int[n+1];

        dp[n] = 1;//base case : empty string
        
        for(int i = n-1; i>=0; i--){
            if(s.charAt(i)=='0') dp[i] = 0;
            else{
                dp[i] = dp[i+1];//if one digit is valid
                if(i+1 < n){
                    int num = Integer.parseInt(s.substring(i, i+2));
                    if(num >= 10 && num <= 26){
                        dp[i]+=dp[i+2];//once we bundle the two nos a new seq. will occur
                    }
                }
            }
        }
        return dp[0];
    }
```

#### intuition
- remember the `i th` element of the array `dp` is the number of ways of decoding the substring in front of i.  
if at `i` only a single digit is valid that means that there is only one way this decoding can go and we give it the value of `i+1` th element.</br>
But when there is single as well as double valid digits then we add `i+2` th element too since we have two ways of going forwasrd from here either we take the single digit or we take the double digit. That is why we add both, to get the total number of ways.